§ 56. Umlaut generally did not take place before Germanic consonant combinations, as dwæscan, to extinguish; æsc from \*askiz, ash-tree; æspe, aspen; fæstan, to fasten; hæftan, to hold captive; mæstan, to fasten; næglan, to nail; ræscan, to coruscate. But umlaut occurs in eft, again; esne, servant; rest, rest; restan, to rest; and in efnan, to perform; stefnan, to regulate, beside æfnan, stæfnan.

§ 57. Germanic a remained in open syllables when originally followed by a guttural vowel (ā, ō, ū) in the next syllable, as pl. nom. acc. dagas, gen. daga, dat. dagum, beside sing. nom. dæg, day; gen. dæges, dat. dæge; neut. nom. acc. plural baþu, baths; bladu, leaves fatu, vats, beside singular bæþ, blæd, fæt; OE. Goth. OS. OHG. faran, O.Icel. fara, to go, travel; nacod, Goth. naqaþs, OHG. nackot, naked; and similarly alan, to nourish; apa, ape; bacan, to bake; calan, to be cold; caru, care; cradol, cradle; dragan, to draw; pres. subj. fare (Goth. farái), he may travel; gaderian from *ʒadurōjan, to gather; galan, to sing; gnagan, to gnaw; grafan, to dig; hafoc, hawk; hafola, hafela, head; hagol, hail; hagu, enclosure; hara, hare; hladan, to load; hraþor, more quickly; lagu, law; latost, latest, slowest; laþaþ, he invites; laþode, he invited; macaþ, he makes; macde, he made; magu, boy; nafula, nafela, navel; racu, narrative; sacan, to quarrel; sacu, strife; sadol, saddle; staþol, pillar; stapelian from *staþulōjan, to establish; talu, statement; wadan, to go, wade. macian from *makōjan, to make; and similarly in the inf. of other weak verbs belonging to class II (§ 535), as baþian, to bathe; dagian, to dawn; gladian, to be glad; hatian, to hate; laþian, to invite.

It also remained in closed syllables before double consonants (except hh), sc, and st, when the next syllable originally contained a guttural vowel, as abbod (Lat. acc.
abbātem), abbot; assa, donkey; catte (OHG. kazza), cat; cassuc, sedge; gaffetung, scoffing; habban (§ 538), to have; hassuc, coarse grass; maffa, caul; mattoc, mattock; sacc, sack; paccian, to flap, pat; flasce (flaxe), flask; masc (max), net; wascan (waxan), to wash; brastlian, to crackle. But a few words have æ beside a, as æsce, ash, cinders; æppel, apple; hnaëppian, to doze; læppa, lappet, beside asce (axe), appla, apples, hnappian, lappa.

Note.—sca- was often written sce-a- with e to denote the palatal pronunciation of the sc, as sceacan, to shake; sceadu, shadow; sceafan, to shave; scealu, scale (balance); screamu (sceomu, § 59), shame, beside scacan, scadu, scafan, scalu, scamu (scomu). See § 51, Note.

§ 58. a became æ when followed by an umlauted vowel in the next syllable, as æces (æx) from *akysi, older *akusi-, axe; and similarly æpele from *aþali (OS. ađali), noble; æpeling from *aþuling, nobleman; æt-, tō-gædere from *-ʒađuri, together; fæsten (OS. fastunnia, fasting), fortress; gædeling (OS. gaduling), companion; hæleþ from *χaluþi-, hero; hærfest from *χaruƀist, harvest; mægden from *maʒađin (OHG. magatin), maiden. The æ in the above examples is a kind of umlaut.

Note.—The a in the stem-syllable of the present participle and gerund of strong verbs belonging to class VI (§ 508) is due to the a of the infinitive, as farende for *færende from *farandi, farenne for *færenne from *farannjai.

§ 59. Germanic a was probably a mid-back-wide vowel like the a in German Mann. In OE. it became a low-back-wide vowel before nasals like the â in French pâte, and the a as pronounced in many Scotch dialects in such words as ant, man, pass, which English people often mistake for o especially when lengthened. In the oldest OE. it was nearly always written a, in the ninth century it was mostly written o, and in late OE. mostly a again, but
in some parts of Mercia it seems to have become o which has been preserved in many of the Midland dialects down to the present day. Examples are: gangan, gongan, Goth. gaggan, O.Icel. ganga, OS. OHG. gangan, to go; hana, hona, Goth. hana, O.Icel. hane, OS. OHG. hano, cock; lang, long, Goth. laggs, O.Icel. langr, OS. OHG. lang, long; nama, noma, Goth. namō, OS. OHG. namo, name; and similarly ancor (Lat. ancora), anchor; bana, slayer; brand, firebrand; camb, comb; camp, battle; candel (Lat. candēla), candle; cann, he can; fana, banner; gandra, gander; gesamnian, to collect; hamor, hammer; hand, hand; lama, lame; lamb, lamb; land, land; manig (Goth. manags), many; mann, man; ramm, ram; spannan, to clasp, fasten; standan, to stand; strang, strong; þanc, thought; þwang, thong; in the pret. singular of many strong verbs of class III (§ 498), as begann, began; dranc, drank; fand, found; sang, sang; swamm, swam; with metathesis of r in born from older bronnn, brann (Goth. brann), burned; orn from older ronn, rann (Goth. rann), ran.

NOTE.—The a became o in unstressed adverbial and pronominal forms, as hwonne, when; on, on; þonne, then; masc. acc. singular hwone, whom; þone, the.

§ 60. a (o) became e (but æ in the oldest period) by i-umlaut, as ende, Goth. andeis, O.Icel. ende, OS. endi, OHG. enti, stem andja-, end; lengra, OS. lengira, OHG. lengiro, longer; sendan, Goth. sandjan, OS. sendian, to send; and similarly benc from *bæŋkiz, bench; cemban, to comb; cempa, warrior; drencan, to give to drink; ened, duck; enge, narrow; englisc, English; fremman, to perform; henn, hen; lengþ, length; menn, men; mengan, to mix; mennisc, human; nemnan, to name; pening, penny; strengra, stronger; þencan, to think; wendan, to turn. bærnan (Goth. brannjan), to burn; ærnan (Goth.